CORONAVIRUS LIVE UPDATES: TASK FORCE TO CONTINUE, TRUMP SAYS, CONTRADICTING EARLIER COMMENTS
Thu, 07 May 2020 12:36:23 GMT
North America
n/a

The European Union's economy is set to contract 7.4 percent this year. Jared Kushner's volunteer brigade complicated the hunt for medical supplies. China criticized the United States government for asserting that the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory. President Trump, contradicting earlier comments, said that the coronavirus task force 'will continue on indefinitely.' Trump contradicts his administration's plans to shut down the coronavirus task force.
President Trump, contradicting his comments from Tuesday, said the White House coronavirus task force would 'continue on indefinitely,' though perhaps with different members.

His announcement, made on Twitter, came one day after Vice President Mike Pence, who has led the group for two months, said it would probably wrap up its work around the end of the May. 'We will have something in a different form,' Mr. Trump later told reporters on Tuesday during a trip to Arizona.

But in a series of Wednesday morning tweets, Mr. Trump appeared to contradict that, and emphasized his desire to reopen the economy despite a continued rise in coronavirus cases and public health warnings that more commerce will mean more deaths.

Mr. Trump wrote that, because of the task force's 'success,' it would 'continue on indefinitely with its focus on SAFETY & OPENING UP OUR COUNTRY AGAIN.'
'We may add or subtract people to it, as appropriate' he said.

The president also hinted at a shift in mission for the task force, saying that it would be 'very focused on Vaccines & Therapeutics.'

Mr. Trump frequently reacts to news coverage of his decisions, and reports on Tuesday that he might wind down the task force drew sharp criticism. The White House was on the defensive within hours: White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany tweeted on Tuesday that reporting on the plan was 'being misconstrued' and that the administration's response would continue to involve experts and be 'data-driven.'
Even as the worst public health crisis in a century raged on, top White House officials have spoken in self-congratulatory terms and sought to shift the debate toward a resumption of normal social and economic life.

Speaking to reporters at the White House on Tuesday, Mr. Pence said of plans to disband the task force, 'It really is all a reflection of the tremendous progress we've made as a country.'
Asked why now was the right time to wind down the task force, he replied, 'Because we can't keep our country closed for the next five years.' No prominent health officials or experts have proposed such a timeline.

There had been signals in recent days of the task force's impending demise: The panel did not meet on Saturday, as it typically does, and canceled a meeting on Monday. And the president has stopped linking his news briefings to the task force's meetings and no longer routinely arrays task force members around him in his public appearances. That change came swiftly after he mused one day about the possibility of injecting disinfectants ' which would be dangerous ' to kill the virus.

Members of the task force, including Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House's virus response coordinator, had to urge Americans not to take those steps. And they often served as a public check on Mr. Trump's questionable or false statements, cautioning about promises of a quick vaccine or the effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine, a drug promoted by the president.The European Union's economy is set to shrink by 7.4 percent this year, investment is expected to collapse and unemployment rates, debts and deficits will balloon in the brutal aftermath of the pandemic, the European Commission said on Wednesday.

To put those figures in perspective, the European Union's economy had been predicted to grow by 1.2 percent this year, and in its worst recession, in 2009 during the financial crisis, its economy shrank by 4.5 percent.

Predicting the breadth of a recession can be a moving target, acknowledged the commission, the bloc's executive arm, and things could end up being much worse.

'The danger of a deeper and more protracted recession is very real,' wrote Maarten Verwey, the head of the commission's economic unit, in a foreword to the forecast.

Italy and Spain, the two European Union countries worst hit, will see their economies shrink by more than 9 percent each. Greece, which had started turning a corner after a decade of economic calamity, will suffer the most of the union's 27 nations, according to the predictions, losing 9.7 of its economic output this year.

And unemployment is expected to be rampant, averaging 9 percent across the bloc and reaching 19.9 percent in Greece, the European Commission said.

The bloc's biggest economy, Germany, will also be hammered, and its economy is projected to shrink by 6.5 percent for the year. France, the bloc's second-largest economy, is expected to contract by 8.5 percent this year.
The grim set of predictions foretell a deeply uneven, but still across-the-board disastrous impact. The European Union is home to more than 400 million people and a major trading partner with the United States, China and the rest of the world.
