Detection of HCoV-NL63 in patient specimens
To show that HCoV-NL63 originated from the nasopharyngeal aspirate of the child, we designed a diagnostic RT-PCR that specifically detects HCoV-NL63. The sequence of the RT-PCR product of the 1b gene was identical to that of the virus identified upon in vitro passage in LLC-MK2 cells (data not shown). The genomes of known coronaviruses contain a variable number of unique characteristic open reading frames (ORFs) encoding nonstructural proteins either between the 1b and S genes, between the S and E genes, between the M and N genes, or downstream of the N gene. The hemagglutinin-esterase gene, which is present in some group 2 coronaviruses, is not present in HCoV-NL63. To confirm that HCoV-NL63 is a new member of the group 1 coronaviruses, we conducted phylogenetic analysis using the nucleotide sequence of the 1a, 1b, S, M and N genes (Fig. For each gene analyzed, HCoV-NL63 clustered with the group 1 coronaviruses. Perhaps most notable is a large insert of 537 nucleotides in the 5′ portion of the S gene of HcoV-NL63, as compared with that of HCoV-229E. An alignment of the HCoV-NL63 S protein sequence with those of other group 1 coronaviruses is shown in Supplementary Figure 4 online. Second, a single gene, ORF3, in HCoV-NL63 takes the place of the 4A and 4B genes of HCoV-229E. Third, the 5′ region of the S gene of HCoV-NL63 contains a large in-frame insertion of 537 nucleotides. The N-terminal region of the S protein has been implicated in binding to aminopeptidase N (group I coronaviruses) and sialic acid31,32,33, so the 179–amino acid insert in HCoV-NL63 might be involved in receptor binding and may explain the tropism of this virus in cell culture. Fourth, whereas HCoV-229E is fastidious in cell culture with a narrow host range, HCoV-NL63 replicates efficiently in monkey kidney cells. SARS-CoV is also able to replicate in monkey kidney cells (Vero-E6 cells34), yet the predicted S proteins of SARS-CoV and HCoV-NL63 do not share a domain that could explain the in vitro host cell range of these viruses. Other viral proteins may influence the cell tropism of a virus, but none of the HCoV-NL63 proteins were more closely related to SARS-CoV than to HCoV-229E.
