Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It was first identified in December 2019 in Wuhan, the capital of China's Hubei province, and has since spread globally, resulting in an ongoing pandemic.As of 6 May 2020, more than 3.74 million cases have been reported across 187 countries and territories, resulting in more than 263,000 deaths. More than 1.23 million people have recovered.[8]

Common symptoms include fever, cough, fatigue, shortness of breath, and loss of smell and taste.While the majority of cases result in mild symptoms, some progress to viral pneumonia, multi-organ failure, or cytokine storm. The time from exposure to onset of symptoms is typically around five days but may range from two to fourteen days.

The virus is primarily spread between people during close contact,[a] often via small droplets produced by coughing,[b] sneezing, and talking. The droplets usually fall to the ground or onto surfaces rather than remaining in the air over long distances.[6] People may also become infected by touching a contaminated surface and then touching their face.On surfaces, the amount of virus declines over time until it is insufficient to remain infectious, but it may be detected for hours or days.It is most contagious during the first three days after the onset of symptoms, although spread may be possible before symptoms appear and in later stages of the disease. The standard method of diagnosis is by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) from a nasopharyngeal swab. Chest CT imaging may also be helpful for diagnosis in individuals where there is a high suspicion of infection based on symptoms and risk factors; however, guidelines do not recommend using it for routine screening.

Recommended measures to prevent infection include frequent hand washing, maintaining physical distance from others (especially from those with symptoms), quarantine, covering coughs, and keeping unwashed hands away from the face. In addition, the use of a face covering is recommended for those who suspect they have the virus and their caregivers. Recommendations for face covering use by the general public vary, with some authorities recommending, some recommending against, and others requiring their use. There is limited evidence for or against the use of masks (medical or other) in healthy individuals in the wider community.

According to the World Health Organization, there are no available vaccines nor specific antiviral treatments for COVID-19.[6] On 1 May 2020, the United States gave Emergency Use Authorization to the antiviral remdesivir for people hospitalized with severe COVID-19. Management involves the treatment of symptoms, supportive care, isolation, and experimental measures.The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC)on 30 January 2020 and a pandemic on 11 March 2020. Local transmission of the disease has occurred in most countries across all six WHO regions.
